This gets us to an interesting
place because if you've used
frameworks like React, the thing is
every framework has a syntax for
handling conditionals and loops.
But for Solid, because we have the single
render method, it resembles more things,
like Vue or Svelte,
like these kinda templating languages, but
we're using JSX cuz it's portable,
cuz we can package it up and slice it up.
We have to give certain things
special consideration,
lists are one of them because,
I mean, think about what happens.
If you had some reactive list and
you call map on it and
it creates a bunch of li's,
which are real DOM elements.
And then someone goes and
changes the list, adds an entry.
Well, a map function has no choice but
to iterate the whole list again and
map out the new results, so
you'd end up with all new list elements.
That would be incredibly
expensive because, I mean,
DOM creation is the most expensive thing,
that's what you wanna avoid.
So we technically need a helper
function to do this, not list.map, but
like a special map function that goes,
okay, if this item is already in
the list don't recreate the DOM elements,
use the existing DOM elements.
So we had a choice, and we do actually
ship this helper called mapArray.
But coming maybe from
some other frameworks,
I thought it was way more ergonomic
to ship it as a component.
Because the beautiful thing about
components is that they compose.
So essentially, if we have our list,
this is very similar to the map function,
we still pass what's called a render prop
where we pass in a function which lets us
get the list item.
But this isn't a good way of
kind of wrapping up our logic,
because let's say, I mean,
that's For components is fine.
But let's say you wanna
do a virtualized list or
a paginated list where you're
only showing ten items at a time.
Well, all you do is go import that from
the library that you're gonna use.
And you're kinda back here anyway,
the second that you need to actually build
actual things, you're gonna find that
there's gonna be components for it.
Conditionals become error boundaries and
suspense and
layouts, loops become paginated and
virtual.
So we just kind of skip the step, we just
start basically at the component level,
and the thing is these
components are not compiled.
It's not like a syntax we're looking for
other than it being a JSX element.
In fact,
you saw all that we do with components.
This is actually a runtime thing.
If you don't like Solid's for loop,
write your own, it's just a component.
This is important.
We handle thing like list
by wrapping it in a getter,
we handle the children by just using these
simple heuristics in the JSX basically,
looking at do you call function.
Then we need to access it lazily,
otherwise, just inline the value.
And with that, you can build all sorts
of control flow components with it.
I could actually use this moment to kind
of show a quick demo, although we're gonna
be revisiting this demo or a different
version of this demo in a minute.
But I just wanted to kinda show very
easily here how we can use a for,
for example, to handle some props and
handle a whole bunch of
logic in our component to passing
in theme colors and whatnot.
Getting the full details of this example
yet probably not terribly important, but
the important thing is that we can have
stuff like visibility changing what's
active and complete,
changing theme color on top of something.
So you can have a whole bunch of different
distinct logic in a single component.
And here I have this filter
function called log and
I have three todos on a list
that are get updated.
But what's really cool is,
if you update, say,
one item in the list, you can see
that number count on the bottom and
it's not gonna recall the filter cuz we're
just changing the check state of one item.
It's fine grained.
If we have some kinda prop coming in
from above that changes the theme color,
we don't have to rerun the component here.
So all the changes are essentially
isolated from each other because it's all
based on the dependencies and
there's no dependency arrays, so
you don't really have
to worry about it much.
What's really cool about this kind of
thing is you don't see dependency arrays,
there's actually no createMemo here,
didn't even bother, didn't need it.
There's no memo, there is no memo
functions, use callback, no any of that,
you literally just write the code
that you need to do the update, and
each piece updates independently.
>> So this is where Solid completely
deviates from Vue and React,
rendering is tied to respond to the data
instead of rerunning the full components.
>> Yeah, that's exactly correct.
And as I said, this was an older idea, and
Vue has actually almost
identical reactive system.
But by foregoing the VDOM we get
into an interesting different zone
because the rendering can be just
an extension of the reactive system,
as long as we can assure the reactive
system is consistent and dependable.
That's basically the big thing, right?
Virtual DOM kinda rose up at a time period
where we were worried about things like
flux and we were sort of think about,
unidirectional flow and
a lot of the early patterns back
then like MVVM, and stuff.
There's a lot of like, I call them
the butterfly effect where you update one
thing and other things do and
it bounces around.
I learned a lot from React, right?
This project did not start off as trying
to improve on React or replace it,
it was the other way around.
I was trying to improve on these kind of
older patterns that were having, I say,
difficulties, and React showed us
what best practices look like,
what good patterns look like.
That was the biggest value.
There's a whole philosophy of React,
I like to call it, and
I feel like that's the thing to learn.
It wasn't about the technology,
it's about learning what it
means to build user interfaces.
Different projects have taken various
technology pieces from React,
like Vue using the virtual DOM and
mixing it with reactivity.
But for me, it was never about React's
technology but about their mindset.
I mean, just to kind of nail this
whole thing even further home,
I call this the reactive advantage and
it's kind of important cuz
components run once, and
this actually not a complete unique thing.
A lot of reactive frameworks have this
kind of idea where essentially your
component code is like a setup function
rather than a rerender function.
But what's really cool is you don't have
to ever worry about the order of things or
nesting or stale closures or
any of those kinda details,
you kinda just write the data in a kinda
way that would make sense to you.
And then the templates compile
down to real DOM nodes,
which again is really
powerful as an escape hatch.
It means that at any point you
can go constDiv equals JSX div,
and because it runs once when you
integrate it with Vanilla JavaScript or
stuff like that, it's just very natural.
Solid does have a syntax for refs, so
you can keep your views in a nice
kind of together fashion.
But it's important to understand that
with such a low level of abstraction,
knowing that only the smallest possible
things are gonna update, you can be
confident that you can just like, if you
need to, go mess with those DOM nodes.
And finally and most importantly,
state is independent of components, right?
Component boundaries are for your sake,
how you want to organize your code.
They're not for performance.
The performance is great regardless,
right?
It's about code organization.
A lot of times when you use a library,
you kinda have to go,
I actually wanna hoist this component.
And maybe no one's doing that level of
optimization, but as someone who does
optimization, I'm very aware of this,
where it's like if you add a bunch of
state here that's not related to that todo
list, it's gonna cause the todo list or
render over and over again unless
you annotate and do all this work.
It's really cool how you can basically
make this stuff independent just
by the fact that it knows what's
updates because of the reactive system.
And honestly, the application of
this goes even further than that.
I mentioned I worked on
the Marco team at eBay.
They hired me because having this
kinda knowledge of what updates and
independence also solves some of the more
modern problems we're facing like
partial hydration and whatnot.
Because if you don't wanna ship
all the JavaScript to the browser,
how do you know what JavaScript you need?
This is a good way.
So it just kind of builds on
this reactive foundation.